the existence of free will is surprise
surprise a question that philosophers
have been debating since before records
began
and the main problem appears to be a
contradiction between two thoughts
first there are really good compelling
arguments in favor of all of our actions
ultimately
being determined and by determined i
mean that if we were to
rewind the universe to the same
conditions it was in a million years ago
and press play
every event would happen in exactly the
same way
it is crucial to notice and it is
crucial to insist on
just how irrelevant his definition
of determinism is that he slips in there
in just half a sentence what do we mean
when something is determined what is it
we're questioning
what is the answer or conclusion we're
trying to come to here
it's not a question of whether or not
randomness
exists in the universe it's a separate
legitimate philosophical question so if
you started the universe again
would crystals form differently in caves
would the random movement of atoms in
the ocean
produce ultimately different weather
events in the climate
would the motion of lava trickling down
from a volcano
be the same when you scale this up and
talk about it cosmetic
i mean if you really believe nothing is
random
in the universe that the formation of
every salt crystal in the ocean would be
identical
if you started the news again maybe
that's an interesting philosophical
discussion for you to debate
for you to engage in but it's not what
we mean
by determinism it's not what people are
debating
when they talk about free will either we
are talking about the decisions
we make in our own minds our decisions
our dreams our plans our thoughts about
the future
either we are saying those things those
cognitive experiences that that
subjective
revery either that is something
determined by myself
or it is not determined by myself
by determined i mean that if we were to
rewind the universe to the same
conditions it was in a million years ago
and press play
every event would happen in exactly the
same way including the actions of human
beings
and if you believe it is not determined
by yourself
that has nothing to do with restarting
the universe again and questioning
whether or not random events would be
different
the formation of crystals weather in the
climate et cetera or even the progress
of evolution that ultimately at one
point is proceeding on a
on the level of a single cell the
formation of the first amoeba would that
have happened in the same way
with the vagaries of you know organic
chemistry
millions of years ago either we are
saying these thoughts these plans these
decisions these dreams are determining
myself
or if they are not determined by myself
perhaps we mean
someone else determines it perhaps we
mean
something else determines it something
with no sentience
or perhaps we mean nothing determines it
that it is entirely arbitrary or
meaningless
this whole discourse about determinism
rests on a categorical error followed
by a false dichotomy false dichotomy
sounds like a little bit of a confusing
technical term the reality is that when
we engage in false dichotomies and when
people
find them convincing we're leaning on
cultural familiarity
if i say to someone that i'm not a
marxist
or that i'm an anti-marxist and they
respond and say oh well you must be
pro-capitalist
you know or they might even say you must
be right-wing this reflects
a false psychotomy in their mind and
their perspective and by the way that
may be their experience in life
it may be that their experience within
their own culture is that there are only
two possibilities
either you're a marxist or you're a pro
capitalist and no
this this isn't the case at all you know
some people would talk about the theory
of evolution
and if somebody says they're against the
theory of evolution then the assumption
is
that they must be a creationist and
creationist is obviously very culturally
specific
oh you must be a christian who supports
this view of creationism etc
maybe not maybe they are a buddhist who
grew up in traditional buddhist culture
and they have a completely alien set of
reasons for being opposed to now
again my point is not that any of these
points of view is more
valid than the other but very often we
indulge
in thinking in terms of false economists
go there are only two possibilities here
like either you support determinism or
you support
free will and how do we get to that
ultimatum how do we get to that false
economy
just by saying something that is
strictly speaking
completely irrelevant to the question
like well
if we were to rewind the universe and
then press play again that is a
non-falsifiable speculative
hypothetical claim and it's irrelevant
by determined i mean that if we were to
rewind the universe to the same
conditions it was in a million years ago
and press play
every event would happen in exactly the
same way including the actions of human
beings
the question is this choice my choice
is this dream my dream do i make this
decision for myself
or not is completely separate
from the question of if we rewound the
universe and played it again
would you make the same decision is that
does it take a genius to recognize that
is that too hard for you to follow all
right was it adolf hitler's decision
to massacre all of these people to
create terrible atrocities
crimes against you was that adolf
hitler's decision or not if it wasn't
his decision
what are you saying whose decision was
it was it somebody else's decision
was it nobody's decision was just
arbitrary whatever your philosophical
perspective on this may be
it's completely irrelevant to say well
if we could rewind the universe and then
press play again
adolf hitler would make the same
decision that is not
controverting that is not debating that
is not disputing that is not relevant to
in any way the question of whether or
not adolf hitler himself
was the person who made the decision
that does not reduce the status
of adolf hitler's mentation his
reverie his imagination his planning his
dreams
it does not reduce that cognitive
process
to being something that is just as
clearly determined by the laws of
physics
as the formation of salt into a salt
crystal
there is a tremendous burden of proof on
you
if you are supposedly scientifically
going to prove that that's all there is
to the process of forming a thought or
experiencing a dream
now hear what he says in this next clip
he is again relying
on what is philosophically and largely
called a
categorical error a category mistake
determinism is largely a product of the
rise of the scientific method and the
belief
that the universe operates in accordance
with laws of cause and effect
that every event in the universe has
some sufficient explanation
for why it happened that is some
preceding cause that necessitated it
all of this was covered by karl popper
like 40 years ago a very very long time
ago
oh oh so every event is explained by the
laws of physics
in terms of cause and effect dreams
are you saying that dreaming is
explained by the lots of cause of it
really
that can't be random and arbitrary and
meaningless oh and you're saying within
physics there's nothing in the universe
that's random and arbitrary and it's
just truly
random where it's it's not determined
one way or another that
in fact there are theoretical physicists
who say if you re-round the universal
plate again
it it could go either there's just no
sufficient reason for one thing
you don't think that's a debate that
exists within physics okay
but karl popper's point would be what
you're doing here is mixing up different
domains
of knowledge the types of claims made by
sigmund freud the types of claims made
about
the human psyche the human imagination
dreaming when you're asleep
and also dreaming in the sense of being
awake
and wondering what you're going to do
with your future planning maybe you
should go to university and study to be
a poet
and maybe you should go to university
and study to become a stockbroker and
financial analyst
that that process that you're driving
that abstract reflective
speculative thought you're engaging in
without some
evidence that proves that it is
truly equivalent to the formation of a
salt crystal out of salt
why would anyone presume to take the
laws of physics
and extend them with no evidence
to dreaming and how dare you glorify
this pseudo-religious new age horseshit
of believing in determinism absolutely
playing the same role that the christian
god
did before that the jewish god that the
muslim god did before
of deciding each and every tiny decision
you make
secretly lurking just above your heads
like a floating angel
how dare you justify that as a
scientific
perspective when every step of your
argument
is relying on inviting the audience to
believe in
things that are unseen have no evidence
are not falsifiable are not scientific
and
if they were true would not change
anything
that could ever be measured measurable
provable
one of the problems with theories about
the speed of light in the past was
whether or not any of them could be
proven like
well if you can if you can have one
theory that light is array and another
theory that it's a
a kind of wave you have different
theories about the different types of
particles of light
up to a certain point in the 20th
century it's like okay we have different
theoretical approaches
to explaining what light is and how it
functions
is it something more like a radio wave
or something more like an atom or what
you know
really it doesn't matter until you reach
the point where those are
testable falsifiable where there is a
difference
in the real world einstein played a
decisive role in that history
written about and celebrated by karl
popper it's folded into karl popper's
philosophy of science if one theory or
another were true
we should be able to test it by
measuring how much the light
bends out of its course to what extent
rays of light are
bent by making certain careful
observations with a telescope
during an eclipse so now the different
theories
they had measurable real world outcomes
measurable
consequences so light is something that
doesn't always travel in a straight line
it can bend
in response to mass in response to
gravity okay now we have a testable
hypothesis
now we can speak in terms of truth and
falsehood now we can speak in terms of
science
because when you're just making [ __ ] up
when you're just telling us
which set of philosophical assumptions
seems more compelling to you
you're not in the domain of science
you're in a domain
that much more closely resembles
mythology
and that was karl popper's critique of
sigmund freud that was karl popper's
critique of a whole generation of people
who kept trying to expand the sciences
to encompass and include the human mind
and there just is no reason to regard
the human mind as something that is
determined by cause and effect
in the same way as salt forming a salt
crystal